So, now, we're going to start talking about denormalization.
We just spent a lot of time focused on normalization.
Now, it's time to move to denormalization.
Again, I want to stress,
these really are the most important concepts when we're doing relational data modeling.
So, if you understand these ones or you have
a good understanding of these fundamental concepts,
you're going to be in great shape to be able to
do data modeling for relational databases.
So, the denormalization is the process of trying
to improve the read performance of a database at
the expense of losing some write performance by adding redundant copies of the data.
So, the process of denormalization is all about performance.
Joints on the database allow for outstanding flexibility,
but they are extremely slow.
So, we saw that in the last exercise in the last demo,
we were able to get our table all the way to third normal form,
but then we were able to get all the information that we
originally had in our first table by doing joints.
At one point, we were able to get everything with two different joints,
on three different tables.
So, that's incredible flexibility,
and it's really fantastic that we have that.
But they are slow.
If you're dealing with heavy reads on your database,
you may want to think about denormalizing your table.
Denormalization comes after normalization.
So, this is again,
this is all about a process.
You get your table to normalize form and from there, you denormalize it.
Denormalization may also require more space on
your system and there's now going to be more copies of the data.
While this shouldn't be ignored,
has become less of a concern as space has become less expensive,
and it is not really a limiting factor.
When we do denormalization,
we want to do a logical design change.
That means we're going to model our data differently so that we have denormalized tables.
So, the designer is in charge of keeping the data consistent.
The reads will be fast, the select statement,
but the writes will be slower,
which is the insert, update, and delete statement.
We've talked a lot about getting our data consistent,
but what does this really mean especially when dealing with denormalization?
Once you add more copies of that data,
that means you'll need to make sure that each one of those copies
is updated or deleted at the same time.
For example, if you have two tables with a column,
address of customer, then you will need to do
two insert statements when adding my address.
Or if you're updating my address,
you will need to change that in two places.
Well, this is not difficult in theory or on small projects.
This gets very complicated when we're talking about
large datasets with many applications using the data.
It's just something that you need to be aware of and make sure that you're
handling if you want to use denormalization.
Let's talk about an example here with our two tables.
Here, we have a table called customer and a table called shipping.
Now, remember, denormalization is all about performance.
Let's say we're getting heavy reads from both of these tables,
trying to get information about how much
our customer spent and the kinds of items that we need to ship to their house,
maybe something that they've purchased.
Now, we could have these all in different tables
split up that then we're using a lot of joints to aggregate all the data together.
Or we could just separate it out and have
two tables with duplicate sets of information, right?
Both tables have the name column and both columns have the city column, and that's okay.
Duplicate data is okay in a denormalized form.
From there, we'll have information that's specific to that concept, like shipping.
So, I'm going to ship a particular item or my customer,
he spent a particular amount.